packages/docs/src/guide/essentials/getting-started.md, before:

# Getting Started

This guide will help you create your first command-line application with Gunshi.

We'll start with a simple "Hello World" example and gradually explore more features.

## Hello World Example

Let's create a simple CLI application that greets the user.

Create a new file (e.g., `cli.js` or `cli.ts`) and add the following code:

```js [cli.js]
import { cli } from 'gunshi'

// Run a simple command
await cli(process.argv.slice(2), () => {
  console.log('Hello, World!')
})
```

This minimal example demonstrates the core concept of Gunshi.

The `cli` function takes command-line arguments and a function to execute.

## Running Your CLI

You can run your CLI application with:

```sh
node cli.js
```

You should see the output:

```sh
Hello, World!
```

## Adding Command-Line Arguments

Let's enhance our example to accept a name as an argument.

The function receives a `CommandContext` object (abbreviated as `ctx`) as its parameter.

This context object contains parsed command-line arguments, options, and other execution information:

```js [cli.js]
import { cli } from 'gunshi'

await cli(process.argv.slice(2), ctx => {
  // Access positional arguments
  const name = ctx.positionals[0] || 'World'
  console.log(`Hello, ${name}!`)
})
```

Now you can run:

```sh
node cli.js Alice
```

And you'll see:

```sh
Hello, Alice!
```

## Adding Command Options

Let's add some options to our command:

```js [cli.js]
import { cli } from 'gunshi'

const command = {
  name: 'greeter',
  description: 'A simple greeting CLI',
  args: {
    name: {
      type: 'string',
      short: 'n',
      description: 'Name to greet'
    },
    uppercase: {
      type: 'boolean',
      short: 'u',
      description: 'Convert greeting to uppercase'
    }
  },
  run: ctx => {
    const { name = 'World', uppercase } = ctx.values
    let greeting = `Hello, ${name}!`

    if (uppercase) {
      greeting = greeting.toUpperCase()
    }

    console.log(greeting)
  }
}

await cli(process.argv.slice(2), command)
```

Now you can run:

```sh
node cli.js --name Alice --uppercase
# or with short options
node cli.js -n Alice -u
```

And you'll see:

```sh
HELLO, ALICE!
```

## Built-in Help

Gunshi automatically generates help information for your commands through its built-in plugin system.

Run:

```sh
node cli.js --help
```

You'll see a help message that includes:

Here's an example of the generated help output:

```sh
USAGE:
  COMMAND <OPTIONS>

OPTIONS:
  -h, --help                 Display this help message
  -v, --version              Display this version
  -n, --name <name>          Name to greet
  -u, --uppercase            Convert greeting to uppercase
```

The help message automatically includes:

- Command description
- Available options
- Option descriptions

The standard `cli()` function automatically includes these built-in plugins:

- `@gunshi/plugin-global` - Provides global options like `--help` and `--version`
- `@gunshi/plugin-renderer` - Handles formatted output for help messages, error messages, and usage information

These plugins are included by default when you use `cli()` from the main `gunshi` package. If you use the lower-level `run()` function instead, you'll need to manually configure these plugins to get help and version functionality.

<!-- eslint-disable markdown/no-missing-label-refs -->

> [!TIP]
> Want to learn more about Gunshi's plugin architecture? Check out the [Plugin System guide](./plugin-system.md) to understand how plugins work, explore the built-in plugins in detail, and learn how to create your own custom plugins to extend your CLI's functionality.

<!-- eslint-enable markdown/no-missing-label-refs -->

## Using Gunshi with Different Runtimes

Gunshi is designed to work seamlessly across multiple JavaScript runtimes. Here's how to use it with each supported environment:

### Node.js

For Node.js applications, use `process.argv.slice(2)` to pass command-line arguments:

```js
import { cli } from 'gunshi'

await cli(process.argv.slice(2), command)
```

### Deno

In Deno, use `Deno.args` to access command-line arguments:

```js
import { cli } from 'jsr:@gunshi/gunshi'

await cli(Deno.args, command)
```

### Bun

Bun also provides `Bun.argv` similar to Node.js:

```js
import { cli } from 'gunshi'

await cli(Bun.argv.slice(2), command) // or use process.argv.slice(2) in Bun
```

Note that while the argument passing differs slightly between runtimes, the Gunshi API remains consistent across all environments.

## Next Steps

You've successfully created your first Gunshi CLI application! You've learned the fundamentals: creating basic commands, handling arguments and options, using the built-in help system, and running your CLI across different JavaScript runtimes.

Now it's time to explore the essential features that will help you build powerful, production-ready CLI applications.

The following chapters will guide you through each topic:

- **[Declarative Configuration](./declarative.md)** - Organize commands with clear, maintainable declarative structures
- **[Type Safety](./type-safe.md)** - Leverage TypeScript for automatic type inference and compile-time checking
- **[Composable Sub-commands](./composable.md)** - Build complex CLIs with modular sub-commands like `git commit` or `npm install`
- **[Lazy & Async Command Loading](./lazy-async.md)** - Optimize startup performance by loading commands only when needed
- **[Auto Usage Generation](./auto-usage.md)** - Create self-documenting CLIs with automatic help and usage information
- **[Plugin System](./plugin-system.md)** - Extend your CLI with modular plugins for features like i18n and shell completion

Each chapter builds upon the previous ones, introducing more sophisticated patterns and techniques.

Start with [Declarative Configuration](./declarative.md) to learn how to structure your commands in a clean, maintainable way as your CLI grows in complexity.

Commit message:

docs: add fully example code links

packages/docs/src/guide/essentials/getting-started.md, after:

# Getting Started

This guide will help you create your first command-line application with Gunshi.

We'll start with a simple "Hello World" example and gradually explore more features.

## Hello World Example

Let's create a simple CLI application that greets the user.

Create a new file (e.g., `cli.js` or `cli.ts`) and add the following code:

```js [cli.js]
import { cli } from 'gunshi'

// Run a simple command
await cli(process.argv.slice(2), () => {
  console.log('Hello, World!')
})
```

> [!TIP]
> The example fully code is [here](https://github.com/kazupon/gunshi/tree/main/playground/essentials/getting-started/hello).

This minimal example demonstrates the core concept of Gunshi.

The `cli` function takes command-line arguments and a function to execute.

## Running Your CLI

You can run your CLI application with:

```sh
node cli.js
```

You should see the output:

```sh
Hello, World!
```

## Adding Command-Line Arguments

Let's enhance our example to accept a name as an argument.

The function receives a `CommandContext` object (abbreviated as `ctx`) as its parameter.

This context object contains parsed command-line arguments, options, and other execution information:

```js [cli.js]
import { cli } from 'gunshi'

await cli(process.argv.slice(2), ctx => {
  // Access positional arguments
  const name = ctx.positionals[0] || 'World'
  console.log(`Hello, ${name}!`)
})
```

> [!TIP]
> The example fully code is [here](https://github.com/kazupon/gunshi/tree/main/playground/essentials/getting-started/context).

Now you can run:

```sh
node cli.js Alice
```

And you'll see:

```sh
Hello, Alice!
```

## Adding Command Options

Let's add some options to our command:

```js [cli.js]
import { cli } from 'gunshi'

const command = {
  name: 'greeter',
  description: 'A simple greeting CLI',
  args: {
    name: {
      type: 'string',
      short: 'n',
      description: 'Name to greet'
    },
    uppercase: {
      type: 'boolean',
      short: 'u',
      description: 'Convert greeting to uppercase'
    }
  },
  run: ctx => {
    const { name = 'World', uppercase } = ctx.values
    let greeting = `Hello, ${name}!`

    if (uppercase) {
      greeting = greeting.toUpperCase()
    }

    console.log(greeting)
  }
}

await cli(process.argv.slice(2), command)
```

> [!TIP]
> The example fully code is [here](https://github.com/kazupon/gunshi/tree/main/playground/essentials/getting-started/options).

Now you can run:

```sh
node cli.js --name Alice --uppercase
# or with short options
node cli.js -n Alice -u
```

And you'll see:

```sh
HELLO, ALICE!
```

## Built-in Help

Gunshi automatically generates help information for your commands through its built-in plugin system.

Run:

```sh
node cli.js --help
```

You'll see a help message that includes:

Here's an example of the generated help output:

```sh
USAGE:
  COMMAND <OPTIONS>

OPTIONS:
  -h, --help                 Display this help message
  -v, --version              Display this version
  -n, --name <name>          Name to greet
  -u, --uppercase            Convert greeting to uppercase
```

The help message automatically includes:

- Command description
- Available options
- Option descriptions

The standard `cli()` function automatically includes these built-in plugins:

- `@gunshi/plugin-global` - Provides global options like `--help` and `--version`
- `@gunshi/plugin-renderer` - Handles formatted output for help messages, error messages, and usage information

These plugins are included by default when you use `cli()` from the main `gunshi` package. If you use the lower-level `run()` function instead, you'll need to manually configure these plugins to get help and version functionality.

<!-- eslint-disable markdown/no-missing-label-refs -->

> [!TIP]
> Want to learn more about Gunshi's plugin architecture? Check out the [Plugin System guide](./plugin-system.md) to understand how plugins work, explore the built-in plugins in detail, and learn how to create your own custom plugins to extend your CLI's functionality.

<!-- eslint-enable markdown/no-missing-label-refs -->

## Using Gunshi with Different Runtimes

Gunshi is designed to work seamlessly across multiple JavaScript runtimes. Here's how to use it with each supported environment:

### Node.js

For Node.js applications, use `process.argv.slice(2)` to pass command-line arguments:

```js
import { cli } from 'gunshi'

await cli(process.argv.slice(2), command)
```

### Deno

In Deno, use `Deno.args` to access command-line arguments:

```js
import { cli } from 'jsr:@gunshi/gunshi'

await cli(Deno.args, command)
```

### Bun

Bun also provides `Bun.argv` similar to Node.js:

```js
import { cli } from 'gunshi'

await cli(Bun.argv.slice(2), command) // or use process.argv.slice(2) in Bun
```

Note that while the argument passing differs slightly between runtimes, the Gunshi API remains consistent across all environments.

## Next Steps

You've successfully created your first Gunshi CLI application! You've learned the fundamentals: creating basic commands, handling arguments and options, using the built-in help system, and running your CLI across different JavaScript runtimes.

Now it's time to explore the essential features that will help you build powerful, production-ready CLI applications.

The following chapters will guide you through each topic:

- **[Declarative Configuration](./declarative.md)** - Organize commands with clear, maintainable declarative structures
- **[Type Safety](./type-safe.md)** - Leverage TypeScript for automatic type inference and compile-time checking
- **[Composable Sub-commands](./composable.md)** - Build complex CLIs with modular sub-commands like `git commit` or `npm install`
- **[Lazy & Async Command Loading](./lazy-async.md)** - Optimize startup performance by loading commands only when needed
- **[Auto Usage Generation](./auto-usage.md)** - Create self-documenting CLIs with automatic help and usage information
- **[Plugin System](./plugin-system.md)** - Extend your CLI with modular plugins for features like i18n and shell completion

Each chapter builds upon the previous ones, introducing more sophisticated patterns and techniques.

Start with [Declarative Configuration](./declarative.md) to learn how to structure your commands in a clean, maintainable way as your CLI grows in complexity.
